---
title: Sessions
icon: ri:arrow-left-right-line
---

# Sessions

Nitro, through [unjs/h3](https://github.com/h3), supports sessions out of the box.

::alert{type="info"}
A session is a series of interactions between a client and server. Because HTTP is a stateless protocol, sessions allow association of multiple requests to the same client using a cookie which is automatically sent by the browser to the server on each request.
::

## Composables available

There is many composables you can use to manage sessions:

- `useSession`, the most importante one since it's a wrapper around all other composables
- `getSession`, to get the current session
- `updateSession`, to update the data of the current session
- `sealSession`, to protect the current session from being modified
- `unsealSession`, to access to the current session
- `clearSession`, to clear the current session

## Use sessions

To use sessions, you've just to use the `useSession` composable and provide a string password in one of your event handler. each time a client will hit this endpoint, the composable will first try to get the session from a header named `x-h3-session` then from a cookie named `h3`. If no session is found, a new one will be created.

```ts [routes/index.ts]
export default defineEventHandler(async (event) => {
  const sessionConfig = useRuntimeConfig().session
  const session = await useSession(event, {
    name: sessionConfig.name,
    password: sessionConfig.password
  })

  return
})
```

Then, you must update your `nitro.config.ts` with your session config:

```ts [nitro.config.ts]
export default defineNitroConfig({
  runtimeConfig: {
    session: {
      name: "custom-name", // The name of the cookie and the header, x-<name>-session, used to retrieve the session
      password: process.env.NITRO_SESSION_PASSWORD || "", // Password used to seal the session
    }
  }
})
```

We recommend you to use a global config from `nitro.config.ts` to easily retrieve session settings in your event handlers.

Starting from now, Nitro will return a header `Set-Cookie` with a cookie named `custom-name` to the client. This cookie is sealed so the client won't be able to read or modify it.

::alert{type="info"}
Using a custom name is useful when you want to use multiple sessions in the same application.
::

The `useSession` composable returns an object with three properties:

- `data`, the data of the current session
- `update`, a function to update the data of the current session
- `clear`, a function to clear the current session

So, you can easily update the data of the current session:

```ts [routes/index.ts]
export default defineEventHandler(async (event) => {
  const sessionConfig = useRuntimeConfig().session
  const session = await useSession(event, {
    name: sessionConfig.name,
    password: sessionConfig.password
  })

  session.update({ foo: 'bar' })

  return session.data
})
```

Then, when the client will hit Nitro with the cookie, you will be able to retrieve the data of the session:

```ts [routes/data.ts]
export default defineEventHandler(async (event) => {
  const sessionConfig = useRuntimeConfig().session
  const session = await useSession(event, {
    name: sessionConfig.name,
    password: sessionConfig.password
  })

  return session.data // { foo: 'bar' }
})
```

::callout{type="info"}
#summary
How `useSession` works?
#content
Under the hood, the `useSession` composable will use the `getSession` to retrieve the current session returned as `data` and return the `updateSession` as `update` and `clearSession` as `clear`. `sealSession` is used when the `updateSession` is called with the provided password and the `unsealSession` is used when the `getSession` is called with the provided password.
::

## Customization

### Cookie

You can customize the cookie name by providing a `name` property in the options of `useSession`. You can also add serialized options to the cookie by providing a `cookie` property in the options of `useSession`. This property is an object with the following properties:

- `maxAge`, the maximum age of the cookie **in seconds**
- `expires`, the expiration date of the cookie
- `path`, the path of the cookie
- `domain`, the domain of the cookie
- `secure`, a boolean indicating if the cookie is secure
- `httpOnly`, a boolean indicating if the cookie is http only
- `sameSite`, the same site policy of the cookie

<!-- TODO: we could add more informations about the crypto and seal options but I dont' know if it's relevant here. -->
