---
icon: ri:tools-line
---

# Server Utils

> Enjoy auto imported server utils and extend with your own utils.

## Auto imports

When reading the rest of the docs, you might notice that there are no `imports` in examples for using utilities.
It is because Nitro uses [unjs/unimport](https://github.com/unjs/unimport) to auto import utilities when used with full tree-shaking support so you don't have to!

## H3 utils

Nitro enables all [h3 utils](https://h3.unjs.io/utils) as auto imports so you can use `defineEventHandler`, `readBody`, etc without manually importing them.

::read-more{title="H3 Docs" to="https://h3.unjs.io/utils"}
::


### `utils` directory

You can add your application specific utils inside `utils/` directory and they will be auto imported when used.
Every export in the `utils` directory and its subdirectories will become available globally in your application.


**Example:** Create a `utils/sum.ts` file where a function `useSum` is exported:

```ts [utils/sum.ts]
export function useSum(a: number, b: number) { return a + b }
```

Use it in your `routes/index.ts` file without importing it:

```ts [routes/index.ts]
export default defineEventHandler(() => {
  const sum = useSum(1, 2) // auto-imported
  return { sum }
})
```

## Nitro utils

Nitro also exposes several built-in utils:

<!-- TODO: use automd -->

- `defineCachedFunction(fn, options)`{lang=ts} / `cachedFunction(fn, options)`{lang=ts}
- `defineCachedEventHandler(handler, options)`{lang=ts} / `cachedEventHandler(handler, options)`{lang=ts}
- `defineRenderHandler(handler)`{lang=ts}
- `defineRouteMeta(options)`{lang=ts} (experimental)
- `useRuntimeConfig(event?)`{lang=ts}
- `useAppConfig(event?)`{lang=ts}
- `useStorage(base?)`{lang=ts}
- `useNitroApp()`{lang=ts}
- `defineNitroPlugin(plugin)`{lang=ts}
- `nitroPlugin(plugin)`{lang=ts}
- `getRouteRules(event)`{lang=ts}

::read-more{to="https://github.com/unjs/nitro/blob/main/src/imports.ts"}
Check [the source code](https://github.com/unjs/nitro/blob/main/src/imports.ts) for list of available Nitro auto imports.
::

::read-more{to="/guide/typescript"}
The types are auto generated for global auto-imports when running the `prepare` or `dev` command. See [TypeScript](/guide/typescript) guide, for IDE support.
::

## Manual imports

For some edge cases (IDE support and libraries in `node_modules`) it is impossible to rely on auto imports.

You can explicitly import them from virtual `#imports` file.

> [!TIP]
> Manually importing from `#imports` still has benefits of tree-shaking.

```js [plugins/test.ts]
import { useStorage } from '#imports'
```

## Async Context (Experimental)

Nitro (2.6+) enables a new server development experience in order to split application logic into smaller "composable" utilities that are fully decoupled from each other and can directly assess to a shared context (request event) without needing it to be passed along. This pattern is inspired from [Vue Composition API](https://vuejs.org/guide/extras/composition-api-faq.html#why-composition-api) and powered by [unjs/unctx](https://github.com/unjs/unctx).

::note
This feature is currently supported for Node.js and Bun runtimes and also coming soon to other presets that support [`AsyncLocalStorage`](https://nodejs.org/api/async_context.html#class-asynclocalstorage) interface.
::

In order to enable async context feature, you have to enable `asyncContext` flag:

::code-group
```ts [nitro.config.ts]
export default defineNitroConfig({
  experimental: {
    asyncContext: true
  }
});
```
```ts [nuxt.config.ts]
export default defineNuxtConfig({
  nitro: {
    experimental: {
      asyncContext: true
    }
  }
})
```
::

After enabling this flag, you can use `useEvent()` (auto imported) in any utility or composable to access the request event without manually passing it along:

::code-group
```ts [with async context]
// routes/index.ts
export default defineEventHandler(async () => {
  const user = await useAuth()
})

// utils/auth.ts
export function useAuth() {
  return useSession(useEvent())
}
```
```ts [without async context]
// routes/index.ts
export default defineEventHandler(async (event) => {
  const user = await useAuth(event)
})

// utils/auth.ts
export function useAuth(event) {
  return useSession(event)
}
```
::

