---
icon: ri:speed-line
---

# Cache

Nitro provides a powerful caching system built on top of the [storage layer](/guide/storage).

It stores the data in the `cache` mount point.

- In development, it will use the [filesystem driver](https://unstorage.unjs.io/drivers/fs) writing to `.nitro/cache` or `.nuxt/cache` if using [Nuxt](https://nuxt.com).
- In production, it will use the [memory driver](https://unstorage.unjs.io/drivers/memory) by default.

To overwrite the production storage, set the `cache` mount point using the `storage` option:

::code-group
```ts [nitro.config.ts]
export default defineNitroConfig({
  storage: {
    cache: {
      driver: 'redis',
      /* redis connector options */
    }
  }
})
```
```ts [nuxt.config.ts]
export default defineNuxtConfig({
  nitro: {
    storage: {
      cache: {
        driver: 'redis',
        /* redis connector options */
      }
    }
  }
})
```
::

In development, you can also overwrite the cache mount point using the `devStorage` option:

::code-group
```ts [nitro.config.ts]
export default defineNitroConfig({
  devStorage: {
    cache: {
      driver: 'redis',
      /* redis connector options */
    }
  }
})
```
```ts [nuxt.config.ts]
export default defineNuxtConfig({
  nitro: {
    devStorage: {
      cache: {
        driver: 'redis',
        /* redis connector options */
      }
    }
  }
})
```
::

## Usage

There is several way to use the cache layer.

You can wrap a function or an event handler or use the route rules. The cached data will be stored, in development, in `.nitro/cache`. You can create namespaces by using the `group` option. By default, it's `nitro/handlers` for handlers and `nitro/functions` for functions.

### Cached Event Handler

To cache an event handler, you've just to use the `defineCachedEventHandler` function. It works like the `defineEventHandler` function but with an additional `options` parameter.

::code-group
```ts [Router Handler]
// Cache an API handler
export default defineCachedEventHandler((event) => {
  // My event handler
}, {
  maxAge: 60 * 60 // 1 hour
});
```
::

With this example, the response will be cached for 1 hour and a stale value will be sent to the client while the cache is being updated in the background. If you want to immediately return the updated response set `swr: false`.

It's important to note that by default, all incoming request headers are dropped when handling cached responses. If you define the `varies` option, only the specified headers will be considered when caching and serving the responses.

See the [options](#options) section for more details about the available options.

### Function

You can also cache a function using the `cachedFunction` function. This is useful to cache the result of a function that is not an event handler but a part of it and reuse it in multiple handlers.

For example, you could want to cache for 1 hour the result of an API call:

::code-group
```ts [utils/github.ts]
export const cachedGHStars = defineCachedFunction(async (repo: string) => {
  const data: any = await $fetch(`https://api.github.com/repos/${repo}`)

  return data.stargazers_count
}, {
  maxAge: 60 * 60,
  name: 'ghStars',
  getKey: (repo: string) => repo
})
```
```ts [api/stars/[...repo\\].ts]
export default defineEventHandler(async (event) => {
  const repo = event.context.params.repo
  const stars = await cachedGHStars(repo).catch(() => 0)

  return { repo, stars }
})
```
::

The stars will be cached in development inside **.nitro/cache/functions/ghStars/&lt;owner&gt;/&lt;repo&gt;.json** with `value` being the number of stars.

```json
{"expires":1677851092249,"value":43991,"mtime":1677847492540,"integrity":"ZUHcsxCWEH"}
```

### Route Rules

This feature enables you to add caching routes based on a glob pattern directly in the main configuration file. This is especially useful to have a global cache strategy for a part of your application.

::alert{type="primary"}
This feature is still experimental and may evolve in the future.
::

Cache all the blog routes for 1 hour with `stale-while-revalidate` behavior:

::code-group
```ts [nitro.config.ts]
export default defineNitroConfig({
  routeRules: {
    "/blog/**": {
      swr: 60 * 60,
      // or
      cache: {
        maxAge: 60 * 60
      }
    },
  },
});
```
```ts [nuxt.config.ts]
export default defineNuxtConfig({
  routeRules: {
    "/blog/**": {
      swr: 60 * 60,
      // or
      cache: {
        maxAge: 60 * 60
      }
    },
  }
});
```
::

If we want to use a custom storage mount point, we can use the `base` option. Let's store our cache result for the blog routes in a Redis storage for production:

::code-group
```ts [nitro.config.ts]
export default defineNitroConfig({
  storage: {
    redis: {
      driver: "redis",
      url: "redis://localhost:6379",
    },
  },
  routeRules: {
    "/blog/**": {
      swr: 60 * 60,
      cache: {
        base: "redis",
      },
    },
  },
});
```
```ts [nuxt.config.ts]
export default defineNuxtConfig({
  nitro: {
    storage: {
      redis: {
        driver: "redis",
        url: "redis://localhost:6379",
      },
    },
  },
  routeRules: {
    "/blog/**": {
      swr: 60 * 60,
      cache: {
        base: "redis",
      },
    },
  },
});
```
::

## Options

The `cachedEventHandler` and `cachedFunction` functions accept the following options:
- `name`: Handler name.
  - Type: `String`
  - Default: Guessed from function name if not provided and fallback to `_` otherwise.
- `group`: Part of cache name. Useful to organize cache storage.
  - Type: `String`
  - Default: `'nitro/handlers'` for handlers and `'nitro/functions'` for functions.
- `getKey`: A function that accepts the same arguments of the function and returns a cache key (`String`).
  - Type: `Function`
  - Default: If not provided, a built-in hash function will be used that will generate a key based on the function arguments.
- `integrity`: A value that invalidates the cache when changed.
  - Type: `String`
  - Default: Computed from **function code**, used in development to invalidate the cache when the function code changes.
- `maxAge`: Maximum age that cache is valid in seconds.
  - Type: `Number`
  - Default: `1` (second).
- `staleMaxAge`: Maximum age that a stale cache is valid in seconds. If set to `-1` a stale value will still be sent to the client, while updating the cache in the background.
  - Type: `Number`
  - Default: `0` (disabled).
- `swr`: Enable `stale-while-revalidate` behavior.
  - Default: `true`
- `base`: Name of the storage mountpoint to use for caching.
  - Default: `cache`.
- `shouldInvalidateCache`: A function that returns a `Boolean` to invalidate the current cache and create a new one.
  - Type: `Function`
- `shouldBypassCache`: A function that returns a boolean to bypass the current cache without invalidating the existing entry.
  - Type: `Function`
- `varies`: An array of request headers to be considered for the cache
  - Type: `string[]`
