---
icon: ri:speed-line
---

# Cache

> Nitro provides a caching system built on top of the storage layer.

## Cached event handlers

To cache an event handler, you've just to use the `defineCachedEventHandler` method.

It works like [`defineEventHandler`](https://h3.unjs.io/guide/event-handler) but with an additional second  [options](#options) parameter.

```ts [routes/cached.ts]
// Cache an API handler
export default defineCachedEventHandler((event) => {
  // My event handler
}, { maxAge: 60 * 60 /* 1 hour */ });
```

With this example, the response will be cached for 1 hour and a stale value will be sent to the client while the cache is being updated in the background. If you want to immediately return the updated response set `swr: false`.

::important
All incoming request headers are dropped when handling cached responses. If you define the `varies` option, only the specified headers will be considered when caching and serving the responses.
::

See the [options](#options) section for more details about the available options.

::note
You can also use the `cachedEventHandler` method as alias of `defineCachedEventHandler`.
::

## Cached functions

You can also cache a function using the `defineCachedFunction` function. This is useful to cache the result of a function that is not an event handler but a part of it and reuse it in multiple handlers.

For example, you could want to cache for 1 hour the result of an API call:

::code-group
```ts [utils/github.ts]
export const cachedGHStars = defineCachedFunction(async (repo: string) => {
  const data: any = await $fetch(`https://api.github.com/repos/${repo}`)

  return data.stargazers_count
}, {
  maxAge: 60 * 60,
  name: 'ghStars',
  getKey: (repo: string) => repo
})
```
```ts [api/stars/[...repo\\].ts]
export default defineEventHandler(async (event) => {
  const repo = event.context.params.repo
  const stars = await cachedGHStars(repo).catch(() => 0)

  return { repo, stars }
})
```
::

The stars will be cached in development inside **.nitro/cache/functions/ghStars/&lt;owner&gt;/&lt;repo&gt;.json** with `value` being the number of stars.

```json
{"expires":1677851092249,"value":43991,"mtime":1677847492540,"integrity":"ZUHcsxCWEH"}
```

::note
You can also use the `cachedFunction` method as alias of `defineCachedFunction`.
::

## Caching route rules

This feature enables you to add caching routes based on a glob pattern directly in the main configuration file. This is especially useful to have a global cache strategy for a part of your application.


Cache all the blog routes for 1 hour with `stale-while-revalidate` behavior:

::code-group
```ts [nitro.config.ts]
export default defineNitroConfig({
  routeRules: {
    "/blog/**": { cache: { maxAge: 60 * 60 } },
  },
});
```
```ts [nuxt.config.ts]
export default defineNuxtConfig({
  routeRules: {
    "/blog/**": { cache: { maxAge: 60 * 60 } },
  },
});
```
::

If we want to use a [custom storage](#customize-cache-storage) mount point, we can use the `base` option.

::code-group
```ts [nitro.config.ts]
export default defineNitroConfig({
  storage: {
    redis: {
      driver: "redis",
      url: "redis://localhost:6379",
    },
  },
  routeRules: {
    "/blog/**": { cache: { maxAge: 60 * 60, base: "redis" } },
  },
});
```
```ts [nuxt.config.ts]
export default defineNuxtConfig({
  nitro: {
    storage: {
      redis: {
        driver: "redis",
        url: "redis://localhost:6379",
      },
    },
  },
  routeRules: {
    "/blog/**": { cache: { maxAge: 60 * 60, base: "redis" } },
  },
});
```
::

## Customize cache storage

Nitro stores the data in the `cache:` mount point.

- In production, it will use the [memory driver](https://unstorage.unjs.io/drivers/memory) by default.
- In development, it will use the [filesystem driver](https://unstorage.unjs.io/drivers/fs) writing to a temporary dir.

To overwrite the production storage, set the `cache` mount point using the `storage` option:

::code-group
```ts [nitro.config.ts]
export default defineNitroConfig({
  storage: {
    cache: {
      driver: 'redis',
      /* redis connector options */
    }
  }
})
```
```ts [nuxt.config.ts]
export default defineNuxtConfig({
  nitro: {
    storage: {
      cache: {
        driver: 'redis',
        /* redis connector options */
      }
    }
  }
})
```
::

In development, you can also overwrite the cache mount point using the `devStorage` option:

::code-group
```ts [nitro.config.ts]
export default defineNitroConfig({
  devStorage: {
    cache: {
      driver: 'redis',
      /* redis connector options */
    }
  }
})
```
```ts [nuxt.config.ts]
export default defineNuxtConfig({
  nitro: {
    devStorage: {
      cache: {
        driver: 'redis',
        /* redis connector options */
      }
    }
  }
})
```
::

## Options

The `cachedEventHandler` and `cachedFunction` functions accept the following options:


::field-group
  ::field{name="base" type="string"}
    Name of the storage mountpoint to use for caching, default is `'cache'`.
  ::
  ::field{name="name" type="string"}
    Guessed from function name if not provided and fallback to `'_'` otherwise.
  ::
  ::field{name="group" type="string"}
    Default to `'nitro/handlers'` for handlers and `'nitro/functions'` for functions.
  ::
  ::field{name="getKey()" type="(...args) => string"}
    A function that accepts the same arguments of the function and returns a cache key (`String`). :br
    If not provided, a built-in hash function will be used that will generate a key based on the function arguments.
  ::
  ::field{name="integrity" type="string"}
    A value that invalidates the cache when changed. :br
    By default, it is computed from **function code**, used in development to invalidate the cache when the function code changes.
  ::
  ::field{name="maxAge" type="number"}
    Maximum age that cache is valid in seconds. :br
    Default to `1` (second).
  ::
  ::field{name="staleMaxAge" type="number"}
    Maximum age that a stale cache is valid in seconds. If set to `-1` a stale value will still be sent to the client, while updating the cache in the background. :br
    Default to `0` (disabled).
  ::
  ::field{name="swr" type="boolean"}
    Enable `stale-while-revalidate` behavior to serve a stale cached response while asynchronously revalidating it. :br
    Default to `true`.
  ::
  ::field{name="base" type="string"}
    Name of the storage mountpoint to use for caching. :br
    Default to `cache`.
  ::
  ::field{name="shouldInvalidateCache()" type="(..args) => boolean"}
    A function that returns a `boolean` to invalidate the current cache and create a new one.
  ::
  ::field{name="shouldBypassCache()" type="(..args) => boolean"}
    A function that returns a `boolean` to bypass the current cache without invalidating the existing entry.
  ::
  ::field{name="varies" type="string[]"}
    An array of request headers to be considered for the cache, [learn more](https://github.com/unjs/nitro/issues/1031). If utilizing in a multi-tenant environment, you may want to pass `['host', 'x-forwarded-host']` to ensure these headers are not discarded and that the cache is unique per tenant.
  ::
::

## Cache keys and invalidation

When using the `defineCachedFunction` or `defineCachedEventHandler` functions, the cache key is generated using the following pattern:

```ts
`${options.group}:${options.name}:${options.getKey(...args)}.json`
```

For example, the following function:

```ts
const getAccessToken = defineCachedFunction(() => {
  return String(Date.now())
}, {
  maxAge: 10,
  name: 'getAccessToken',
  getKey: () => 'default'
})
```

Will generate the following cache key:

```ts
nitro:functions:getAccessToken:default.json
```

You can invalidate the cached function entry with:

```ts
await useStorage('cache').removeItem('nitro:functions:getAccessToken:default.json')
```
